CivSpy-Bukkit/README.md, before:

### CivSpy for Bukkit
-------------

CivSpy for Bukkit is focused on several core functional and operational imperatives:

* Don't lag the server

* Don't lag the database

* Focus on aggregation, not massive data volume

* Simple Periodic Sampling

* Simple Listener Support

* Good documentation

A little extra detail on each main point follows.

-----------------
#### Don't Lag The Server

While CivSpy's architecture can't prevent contributors from developing very poorly behaved `DataListeners` and `DataSamplers`, it does everything in its power to make sure that the flow of point or sampled data from the moment it leaves the listeners and samplers, is moved as quickly and efficiently as possible on its way to eventual database insertion.

Internally, this is accomplished by two main unbounded queues, some memory structures, and a whole host of worker threads focused on Keeping Things Moving.

*The Data Sample Queue* - When a Sampler's `sample()` method returns or a Listener calls `record()`, those records are added to the end of the data sample queue. This is a very fast, very lightweight operation. The Listener can get right back to listening, and the Sampler can get right back to waiting on its next invocation.

*The Aggregation Windows* - Meanwhile, a bunch of dequeue workers are busy pulling DataSamples off the front of the data sample queue, and putting them into special windowed aggregation containers. About half a dozen of these windows (standard configuration) are available, to deal with volume and rate-flow issues. Dequeued DataSamples are summation-aggregated into the appropriate window based on their creation timestamps. Note that PeriodDataSamples are handled special; they are passed directly to the next stage without aggregation. Normal DataSamples, however, must wait a while in their Window, until the window gets old enough that no more data is accepted into it. At that point, a special worker takes all the aggregated data and pushes it on to the batching queue.

*The Batching Queue* - Aggregate data is queued into the end of a special aggregate data queue by various workers from the aggregation window stage. Now final-stage workers grab those aggregations and compile them into batches. These batches are then transmitted to the database for insertion. A typical batch will be about 100 records. If a ton of aggregate data is dumped onto the queue at once, additional final-stage workers are turned on to help deal with the influx. When the calamity has passed, they are released gracefully. These batch workers are watched by a manager, who ensures that should they die or time out, at least one worker is always on the job with more ready to go. They leverage a pool of database connections, so there is little to no latency in submitting their data batches once it is compiled.

Some things are described in general or approximate terms above; check the source code for additional comments and details.

--------------------------
#### Don't Lag The Database

Both the application and database can waste a ton of time renegotiating connections. CivSpy-Bukkit uses HikariCP to keep a pool of connections on hand at all times so that connection establishment isn't happening during high-volume insertions. 

Additionally, all of CivSpy-Bukkit's insertions are strictly batched. The uniformity of sample data enables this highly efficient communication practice to be applied universally, yet by keeping batch sizes relatively small no undue burden is placed on the database or network infrastructure.

-------------------------
#### Focus on Aggregation, Not Massive Data Volume

Pull Requests adding listeners or samplers that generate large amounts of high granularity data will be rejected. If that's what you need, look into Devotion or similar tracks-everything platforms.

The focus here is on periodic low-volume data, or high-volume listeners that yield summation-aggregateable timeslice data. That's a fancy way of saying, listeners and samplers should generate data that has meaning when counted.

Strict adherance to this underlying philosophy lets CivSpy-Bukkit stay lean and effecient.

--------------------------
#### Simple Periodic Sampling

Contributing a new DataSampler is shockingly easy. 

* Follow the [instructions in the com.programmerdan.minecraft.civspy.samplers API](/apidocs/com/programmerdan/minecraft/civspy/samplers/package-summary.html) and make your code.

* Add new dependencies to the [pom](pom.xml). 

* If you depend on or sample another Bukkit plugin, be sure that:
   * Check the plugin exists using the Bukkit tests in your Sampler constructor, and call `deactivate` from your `sample` method if it isn't.
   * Add the plugin dependency to the [soft-depends list in plugin.yml](/src/main/resources/plugin.yml)

* Put the source file in package `com.programmerdan.minecraft.civspy.samplers.impl`.

All done.

-------------------------
#### Simple Listener Support

Similarly, Listeners are very well supported and familiar.

* Follow the [instructions in the com.programmerdan.minecraft.civspy.listeners API](/apidocs/com/programmerdan/minecraft/civspy/listeners/package-summary.html) and make your code.

* Add new dependencies to the [pom](pom.xml). Make sure to give them a scope of provided or compile, as appropriate.

* If you depend on or listen to events from another Bukkit plugin, be sure to add the plugin dependency to the [soft-depends list in plugin.yml](/src/main/resources/plugin.yml). 
   * If that plugin isn't available, the listener will gracefully fail to start.
   * Do not add any hard dependencies; only soft-depends.

* Put the source file in package `com.programmerdan.minecraft.civspy.listeners.impl`.

All done.

-------------------------
#### Good Documentation

I hope you agree that the documentation is clear and comprehensive. If anything is missing or unclear, open an issue on the repository.


----------------------------
### I'm Ready to Contribute

Fork the repo, and get hacking!

Clone locally to check out the javadocs for even more details on getting started with CivSpy. Just navigate to the index.html file inside `apidocs` folder on your local clone from your favorite web-browser.

-----------------
#### Catalogue of Current `stat_key` elements

As of Sept 2 2016:

`player.blockbreak` - Aggregate statistic, breaks down based on string_value of blocktype:subtype and count within aggregation period.
`player.movement` - Aggregate statistic, breaks down based on string_value of movement type (walking, sneaking, vehicle, etc.) within aggregation period.
`server.playercount` - Periodic statistic, default sampling period of every minute, records players online the server.
`world.playercount` - Periodic statistic, default sampling period of every minute, records players online per world on the server.

Commit message:

Updated README with additional capture details for the new listeners and samplers. Remember that if a sampler or listener accepts configuration, you can put it in the config.yml using the _simple class name_ which is just the file name, no package. All samplers support 'period' and some support 'active'

CivSpy-Bukkit/README.md, after:

### CivSpy for Bukkit
-------------

CivSpy for Bukkit is focused on several core functional and operational imperatives:

* Don't lag the server

* Don't lag the database

* Focus on aggregation, not massive data volume

* Simple Periodic Sampling

* Simple Listener Support

* Good documentation

A little extra detail on each main point follows.

-----------------
#### Don't Lag The Server

While CivSpy's architecture can't prevent contributors from developing very poorly behaved `DataListeners` and `DataSamplers`, it does everything in its power to make sure that the flow of point or sampled data from the moment it leaves the listeners and samplers, is moved as quickly and efficiently as possible on its way to eventual database insertion.

Internally, this is accomplished by two main unbounded queues, some memory structures, and a whole host of worker threads focused on Keeping Things Moving.

*The Data Sample Queue* - When a Sampler's `sample()` method returns or a Listener calls `record()`, those records are added to the end of the data sample queue. This is a very fast, very lightweight operation. The Listener can get right back to listening, and the Sampler can get right back to waiting on its next invocation.

*The Aggregation Windows* - Meanwhile, a bunch of dequeue workers are busy pulling DataSamples off the front of the data sample queue, and putting them into special windowed aggregation containers. About half a dozen of these windows (standard configuration) are available, to deal with volume and rate-flow issues. Dequeued DataSamples are summation-aggregated into the appropriate window based on their creation timestamps. Note that PeriodDataSamples are handled special; they are passed directly to the next stage without aggregation. Normal DataSamples, however, must wait a while in their Window, until the window gets old enough that no more data is accepted into it. At that point, a special worker takes all the aggregated data and pushes it on to the batching queue.

*The Batching Queue* - Aggregate data is queued into the end of a special aggregate data queue by various workers from the aggregation window stage. Now final-stage workers grab those aggregations and compile them into batches. These batches are then transmitted to the database for insertion. A typical batch will be about 100 records. If a ton of aggregate data is dumped onto the queue at once, additional final-stage workers are turned on to help deal with the influx. When the calamity has passed, they are released gracefully. These batch workers are watched by a manager, who ensures that should they die or time out, at least one worker is always on the job with more ready to go. They leverage a pool of database connections, so there is little to no latency in submitting their data batches once it is compiled.

Some things are described in general or approximate terms above; check the source code for additional comments and details.

--------------------------
#### Don't Lag The Database

Both the application and database can waste a ton of time renegotiating connections. CivSpy-Bukkit uses HikariCP to keep a pool of connections on hand at all times so that connection establishment isn't happening during high-volume insertions. 

Additionally, all of CivSpy-Bukkit's insertions are strictly batched. The uniformity of sample data enables this highly efficient communication practice to be applied universally, yet by keeping batch sizes relatively small no undue burden is placed on the database or network infrastructure.

-------------------------
#### Focus on Aggregation, Not Massive Data Volume

Pull Requests adding listeners or samplers that generate large amounts of high granularity data will be rejected. If that's what you need, look into Devotion or similar tracks-everything platforms.

The focus here is on periodic low-volume data, or high-volume listeners that yield summation-aggregateable timeslice data. That's a fancy way of saying, listeners and samplers should generate data that has meaning when counted.

Strict adherance to this underlying philosophy lets CivSpy-Bukkit stay lean and effecient.

--------------------------
#### Simple Periodic Sampling

Contributing a new DataSampler is shockingly easy. 

* Follow the [instructions in the com.programmerdan.minecraft.civspy.samplers API](/apidocs/com/programmerdan/minecraft/civspy/samplers/package-summary.html) and make your code.

* Add new dependencies to the [pom](pom.xml). 

* If you depend on or sample another Bukkit plugin, be sure that:
   * Check the plugin exists using the Bukkit tests in your Sampler constructor, and call `deactivate` from your `sample` method if it isn't.
   * Add the plugin dependency to the [soft-depends list in plugin.yml](/src/main/resources/plugin.yml)

* Put the source file in package `com.programmerdan.minecraft.civspy.samplers.impl`.

All done.

-------------------------
#### Simple Listener Support

Similarly, Listeners are very well supported and familiar.

* Follow the [instructions in the com.programmerdan.minecraft.civspy.listeners API](/apidocs/com/programmerdan/minecraft/civspy/listeners/package-summary.html) and make your code.

* Add new dependencies to the [pom](pom.xml). Make sure to give them a scope of provided or compile, as appropriate.

* If you depend on or listen to events from another Bukkit plugin, be sure to add the plugin dependency to the [soft-depends list in plugin.yml](/src/main/resources/plugin.yml). 
   * If that plugin isn't available, the listener will gracefully fail to start.
   * Do not add any hard dependencies; only soft-depends.

* Put the source file in package `com.programmerdan.minecraft.civspy.listeners.impl`.

All done.

-------------------------
#### Good Documentation

I hope you agree that the documentation is clear and comprehensive. If anything is missing or unclear, open an issue on the repository.


----------------------------
### I'm Ready to Contribute

Fork the repo, and get hacking!

Clone locally to check out the javadocs for even more details on getting started with CivSpy. Just navigate to the index.html file inside `apidocs` folder on your local clone from your favorite web-browser.

-----------------
#### Catalog of Current `stat_key` elements

As of Sept 11 2016:

##### Aggregate Statistics

`player.blockbreak` - Breaks down based on string_value of encoded block attributes and count within aggregation period.
`block.drop.TYPE` - When the block broken drops items. TYPE is the material type of the block that is dropping stuff.
`player.craft` - When player crafts something. What was crafted size stored in number value, serialized string in string value.
`player.craft.custom` - For RecipeManager unique crafting with recipe name as string value.
`player.movement` - Breaks down based on string_value of movement type (walking, sneaking, vehicle, etc.) within aggregation period. Includes Vehicle movement, and resets prior location on teleport.
`player.drop` - Records item dropped when a person drops something
`block.dispense.TYPE` - When a dispenser/dropper launches an item. TYPE is the material type of the block that is dispensing.
`entity.death.TYPE`
`entity.death.drop.TYPE`
`entity.death.xp.TYPE` - where TYPE is the EntityType.name() of what died; If killer is a player and isn't empty, UUID is filled for all. Otherwise is null. If creature has a custom name, recorded in string value field for death and XP; not for drop (itemstack serialized recorded there).
`player.killed` - used for PVP kills or death by entities, the UUID of the player or TYPE/Name of the entity responsible for killing is in the string value field. The UUID field holds the player killed in all cases.
`player.killed.drop` - the serialized items dropped by player on death
`player.died` - records player deaths when killed by some non-strictly-entity cause (drowning, etc.). The `drop` contributions are similar to entity death, but the UUID recorded is the player that died.
`player.died.drop` - The serialized items dropped by player on death 
`player.pickup` - Records when a person picks up something
`inventory.pickup.TYPE` - An inventory holder picks up an item. TYPE is the Hopper or HopperMinecart that picked up the item.
`player.blockbreak` - When a player breaks a block. UUID is recorded, and Block serialization is stored in the string value field.

##### Periodic Statistics

`server.playercount` - default sampling period of every minute, records players online the server.
`world.playercount` - default sampling period of every minute, records players online per world on the server.
`server.tick.min` - In sampling period, the minimum tick in milliseconds (shortest observed).
`server.tick.max` - In sampling period, the maximum tick in milliseconds (longest observed).
`server.tick.average` - In sampling period, the average tick in milliseconds.
